Please start by reviewing the requirements in Levels 1 and 2. They will be built upon in this section.

Regardless of which revision control system you go with, It is important to consider the ability to control what kind of privileges a person will have. If it is a project in which you will release the source code to the general public, the general public should only have permission to get a copy of the code, but not push changes directly back to the project. If a new person wants to submit a patch, have them send the patch to someone on the project to review it and make sure it meets the project guidelines. This allows for two things to happen. First, it will let you continue getting patches from the general public and knowing they meet the guidelines. Second, it will build a little trust between the new person and the people on the project. If the person continues to send good patches, you might be able to grant them more permissions. For the folks actively working on the project, they should have permissions to push changes to their area of the project. If a project has a client and a server element to it, each element should be in its own revision control sandbox.  The developers should not have privileges to annihilate the project. However, each project should have two or more project owners to prevent a "hit-by-a-bus" situation, where the only person who has ownership cannot work on the project for any reason, ranging from having to stay home due to an illness to as extreme as being in an accident.

Coding standards for each project should be outlined at the start of the project. This includes any conventions to make the code look uniform and easier to read. Such things can include how many spaces in a tab, the upper limit of lines for a function, how to do comments in the code, and documentation. There should also be rules on how the code is divided up into files, how the directory structure should be laid out, and who is responsible for what. It should also include how folks should submit patches and bug reports. Having guidance for everyone takes a lot of frustration out of a project.

As discussed in earlier sections, having test cases is essential. Usually, these tests are run manually by running a binary with those test cases. This is still useful for any changes you make in the code to make sure your changes don't make something else fail elsewhere in the code. As the project grows, so do the number of tests. Eventually, you will want to have these test automated when you check in your code. The version control software used should allow for running all the tests for the entire code base when new code is added. Tests for any code you modified should be run manually, especially if you are updating the logic of a function. This way you can avoid the most common test failures: the code you just modified.

Building your source code automatically will make life easier for you and your target users when you have more than a couple of files and want some compiling flags to be added in certain conditions, such as compiling test cases. The tool you decide to go with should allow options to be set and then used throughout the rest of the tooling. This way you can specify the correct compiler, the correct options, and the output of the build. Breaking down the build process into logical groups also helps a lot. For example, if compiling a C or C++ program, compile the object files first, then compile the object files into the final binary. Breaking things into groups will allow you to find some bugs at compile time because it makes it easier to see where the build fails and you don't have to compile each file manually.

Development documentation is important for aiding other developers on the workings of your code. Unlike user documentation such as a Quick Install Guide and a README, development documentation dives deeper into the project. These documents should include topics that cover fixing issues, naming conventions within the code, where to send a bug report, and what assumptions were made. This will allow other developers inside and outside the project a chance to better understand your project and what to expect in communication with you.
Expanding on issue tracking from previous sections, the more control over issue tracking you have, the better. Aside from being able to mark an issue as publicly or privately available, there are a few other tools that should be useful. First, being able to assign an issue to an individual developer or a small group of developers. This gives the person who submitted the issue someone to directly contact to get a status report. It also gives the Project Manager an idea of who is doing what and who is tackling what issues. Another useful feature to look at is the ability to have discussions related to changes in an issue. If a change to solve an issue creates a new issue in some other area of the program, the two groups of developers need to work out that new issue together to satisfy the solution of an issue without causing new issues elsewhere. Another useful tool will be to have quick one or two-word status reports to indicate where the code stands, such as "in progress", "needs assignment", "on hold", "testing", or "fixed in patch X.Y.Z".

Communication with up and downstream folks can share findings with bugs easier. For upstream communication, look to communication with any tools required to build the source and be able to communicate with the stakeholders of the project. For downstream work, having multiple ways for folks to reach the team should be available. Internet Relay Chat, or IRC, and mailing lists are common tools as of this writing. These tools allow a live chat in IRC between developers and even between developers and users to help debug their system. Mailing lists are popular to announce releases and for archived communication. In a few cases, a blog can be nice to share what can be done with the project to get folks interested or to share new ways the project is being used.

Deciding where data and structures end up should be worked out early in the design process. This is due to making such changes later in the process can be very difficult to implement. The process should start with sitting down with the developers, system administrators, and any major customers to decide what the inputs are, what the outputs are, and what limitations the software needs to meet. Then, it is possible to decide how to store and access the data. Data storage can be limited by what supporting systems are and are not allowed on a machine that will run the software. You may even be limited in terms on data that is gathered from the outside world. When processing data, you may be on a slow machine in a closet, on multiple high-end machines, or somewhere in between. Knowing what limits there are can guide how the software is designed.

Having security programming excesses will help your developers think better on designing and writing code. Having an environment where trying different things and breaking them can help them write better software in the long run. Looking at simple code examples everyone can learn and understand quickly and then learning how they can be exploited, followed by how to rewrite the code to prevent an attack can go a long way with developers.
